
# PATH PROTOCOL VERSION 2.1.0

2026-07-04

Introduced in ARES 0.5.7, the PATH protocol (PHASE Augmented Through HTTP) is a hybrid filesystem model for data storage systems in Second Life. It builds on the PHASE (Prim-Handle Abstract Storage Engine) protocol and the WEBFS file access mechanism originated in ARES 0.4.4.

The main benefits of PATH over PHASE are as follows:

 - Storage devices track their client (accessor) systems and can reach out to the client in the event of an address change
 - Data transfer over HTTP re-uses the WEBFS protocol, alleviating the need for the ARES _storage daemon to support two fully independent filesystems (the main reason for the change)
 - Data transfer over HTTP supports larger pagination chunks (4K), further allowing for increased speed where memory is available
 - Storage devices can be accessed from outside of SL if desired

As with PHASE 1.x, all standard communications happen on channel 1608011905. The message format is:

	<handle> <command> <argument ...>

<handle> is an arbitrary string, typically a UUID. The supported <command>s are:

	system-to-storage: `connect` `disconnect`
	
	storage-to-system: `version` `reset` `access` `deleted` `new` `update` `denied`

The <argument>s are <command>-specific.

No side channels are required for PATH. All directory and file I/O occurs via HTTP.

Although the PHASE and PATH protocols both use the same external interface, the 'access' message provided by the PATH service specifies the HTTP URL that should be used. A PATH storage device should send the 'denied' message if any unsupported messages are encountered.

In practice it is unlikely that incompatibility between PHASE and PATH will be encountered by end users, since as of this writing PHASE is exclusively used by ARES local storage.


# TERMS

	standard connection: a session initiated by an object in the same sim via the PHASE channel; if this object ceases to exist, then the connection is broken (rediscovery may be attempted)
	
	web connection: a session initiated purely using WEBFS; discovery, recovery, and session expiry behavior are TBD
	
	accessor, client, system: synonyms for the device that wishes to use files
	
	server, storage, host: synonyms for the device that contains files
	
	handle: a UUID generated by the client system for uniquely identifying individual transactions; the handle provided in the connect message is re-used as the token for HTTP access
	
	token: an HTTP string provided by the client as part of the connect message which serves as a means of uniquely identifying the ongoing exchange.
	
	callback URL: an HTTP(S) URL provided by the client where the PATH host will send simple notifications when changes occur to the files on the storage medium.
	
	callback: a message sent to the callback URL, per above.
	

# PATH MESSAGES

`<handle> connect <mode> [<callback-url>]`

	system -> storage
	
	where <mode> is one of: ro rd rw
	
	Initiates a standard connection with the specified access level. The storage device should respond with an "access" command (below), and store the host UUID and granted level of permission for future reference. The modes are defined as "read only" (ro), "read and delete" (rd), or "full access" (rw).
	
	At this point, the storage device should also check through all existing standard connections and confirm that the hosts involved still exist (that is, llGetOwnerKey(id) != id). Failing that, delete those connections.
	
	However, if <handle> is `NULL_KEY`, the client system is simply pinging and does not want to alter the state of any existing connections. A storage device that wants to be seen by the inquiring party (e.g. for public use) should respond with a "version" message; otherwise, no response is required.
	
	For standard PATH connections, the <handle> from the <connect> message will be expected and re-used as token data (see webfs section). This should NOT be the UUID of any object or avatar, as this is too easy to guess and could be falsified during HTTP.

	The server will most likely have a list of pre-approved tokens that it will accept, or it may choose to examine the server object using `llGetObjectDetails()` and `llGetOwnerKey()` to decide if it is trustworthy.
	
	If <callback-url> is provided, then PATH will use WEBFS callback messages and there will be no further communication over the PHASE channel. The storage host will *not* close connections to objects that set callback URLs, even if they cease to exist; this makes callback communications ideal for inter-sim communications. See 'Callbacks', below.


`<handle> version <version> <label>`

	storage -> system
	
	Sent in response to "connect" when <handle> is NULL_KEY. The reply handle should also be NULL_KEY.
	
	<version> is an implementation-specific string up to 64 characters in length with no spaces, e.g. `ARES-_path-0.5.7`
	
	
	<label> is a human-readable (space-containing) descriptor of the volume.


`<handle> reset <label>`

	storage -> system
	
	The storage device has been rebooted and has lost its active connections list. Any client system that recognizes the storage device's address should re-send the "connect" message (above).
	
	Under PATH, the client system should iterate through the list of known mounts to see if the originating object's UUID matches a volume that is currently believed to be mounted. This solves the general problem of storage getting demounted after login/rez. The provided <label>, if present, may be used to more precisely identify the source.
	
	This message should also be generated during the PATH driver's `on_rez()` and `changed(CHANGED_REGION)` events, to prompt accessors to request a new URL.


`<handle> access <mode> <unit> <label> <URL>`

	storage -> system
	
	Responds to a request to a "connect" command (above). 
	
	where <mode> is one of: ro rd rw
	
	The storage device should indicate the level of access it is willing/capable of giving the client system. It should also store the host UUID and granted level of permission for future reference. The useful modes are defined as "read only" (ro), "read and delete" (rd), or "full access" (rw). A mode of "none" indicates the connection was rejected and not stored.
	
	where <unit> is: b
	
	Unlike previous versions of PHASE, PATH does not support other storage unit sizes. If the storage device uses notecard storage, the code necessary to ensure the correct bytes are returned is not entirely trivial and not entirely efficient, but will still much more performant in most cases than traditional PHASE storage, and will benefit immensely from caching, as it is generally safe to assume most file access is done in a sequential manner.
	
	<label> is a freeform text label that describes the volume.
	
	If no access is granted, the device should send the "denied" command.

	<URL> is the HTTP(S) address to which the client system should refer for file access. It must implement the portions of `webfs` used by the current storage mode. The `ro` mode is equivalent to the `static` format. Other implementation details are described in the next section.
	
	When providing a URL, the server will probably want to concatenate the token onto the end:
	
	bare URL: http://simhost-0b58858424be9173e.agni.secondlife.io:12046/cap/38ac7ec0-2fe1-5154-784d-d951a892c5d7
	
	base URL: http://simhost-0b58858424be9173e.agni.secondlife.io:12046/cap/38ac7ec0-2fe1-5154-784d-d951a892c5d7/ffffffff-ffff-ffff-ffff-ffffffffffff/
	
	where "ffffffff-ffff-ffff-ffff-ffffffffffff" is the token (the handle provided by the client in the 'connect' message. (See APPENDIX for an unnecessary polemic about this design decision.)
	
	In normal operation the system will proceed to query <URL> to retrieve a directory listing.


`<handle> url <path>`

	storage -> system
	
	The storage volume's URL has changed, due to a sim restart, new attachment, or region transfer. This is sent only to objects that can still be located after the fact and will not appear e.g. on login when all attachments have new UUIDs; listen also for the more generic 'reset' message.


`<handle> disconnect`

	system -> storage
	
	The system no longer wishes to access the device. Forget the session.


`<handle> deleted <filename>`

	storage -> system
	
	A file has been removed from the system.
	
	The storage device may send this spontaneously in response to an outside action. The handle should be NULL_KEY in this case.


`<handle> new <filename>`

	storage -> system
	
	A file has been added from the system.
	
	The storage device may send this spontaneously in response to an outside action. The handle should be NULL_KEY in this case.


`<handle> update`

	storage -> system
	
	A file has changed in stat information (size, type, desc, etc).


`<handle> denied`

	storage -> system
	
	The requested action exceeds the permissions granted.
	
	The storage device may send this spontaneously in response to an outside action. The handle should be NULL_KEY in this case.
	
	For most actions, 'denied' is not used by PATH, as the webfs operation will fail with a 40x error code.


`<handle> callback <url>`

	system -> storage
	
	Added in PATH 2.1.0. Please send update messages to the above URL using the WEBFS callback mechanism instead of the PHASE channel.
	
	If a callback URL is set, then PATH will use WEBFS callback messages and there will be no further communication over the PHASE channel. The storage host will *not* close connections to objects that set callback URLs, even if they cease to exist; this makes callback communications ideal for inter-sim communications. See 'Callbacks', below.
	
	No reply is given by the storage host in response to receiving this message.


# WEBFS

Under PATH, the following standard operations are defined as taking place over HTTP using a webfs endpoint: stat, read, delete, write, append.

The webfs base URL must end in a / -- for PATH systems, this could be the raw `llRequestURL()` result.

Since SL scripts cannot read arbitrary HTTP headers (there is a narrow vocabulary of accepted headers, but the list at https://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/LlGetHTTPHeader is not 100% accurate) metadata is passed as part of the URL, either in the path or query string. Individual messages will explain this in more detail.

Directory listings are accessed at the webfs base URL or session URL, in plain text, with the format:

```
<filename> <size>
<filename> <size>
<filename> <size>
<filename> <size>
```

There is no trailing newline: each entry consists of a filename, a space, and the size.

However, if the source is configured to require authentication, GET requests to the base URL with no query string will yield a 401 Unauthorized status code or 403 Forbidden.


## Session management

Under PATH, session control is conducted via the PHASE 'connect' and 'disconnect' messages. However, a fully-qualified PATH source can do double duty as a webfs system, which necessitates some form of access control.

To initiate a webfs session, the client system POSTs to the URL:

	`<base URL>?action=connect&mode=<mode>`

with the content:

	`{"token":"<token>"}`

or

	`{"token":"<token>","callback":"<url>"}`

where <token> is set to an arbitrary secret value unique to the system, ideally a UUID, and <callback> is an HTTP(S) URL to which webfs updates will be POSTed. Any 'connect' message sent using this token will cause previous sessions with the same token to be dropped. The value NULL_KEY ("00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000") is forbidden.

<mode> is as used in the PHASE protocol (see earlier); one of: ro rd rw

Upon success, the server will respond with 200 OK. The message body will be in JSON:

	`{"mode":"<mode>","url":"<session URL>","version":"<version>","label":"<label>"}`

where:

	<mode> is the actual mode granted (`ro`, `rd`, or `rw`), which may be less than the access requested
	
	<session URL> is the prefix that should be used for all other actions besides 'disconnect'
	
	<version> is as in the 'version' PATH message
	
	<label> is as in the 'version' PATH message

If the connection is refused, then a 403 Forbidden HTTP status is generated with an explanatory body message. Token headers are not included with these responses, so client systems should track a mapping between query tokens and request keys if they are capable of brokering multiple sessions with the same storage device (i.e. on behalf of multiple users who might decide to mount the same storage medium).

To end a session gracefully, POST the message `{"token":"<token>"}` to:

	`<base URL>?action=disconnect`


## Reading files

Although existing static implementations of webfs successfully implement the 'Range' header for file reads, HTTP servers inside SL cannot access this header. Thus to retrieve a file, or portions of a file, the system must encode this information as query string data.

To attempt to retrieve the entirety of a file, sending

	`<session URL>foobar.txt`

will work. (Remembering that <session URL> ends in '/'). If the resultant Content-Length is below 4096 bytes then the client can be confident the whole file was retrieved. For reading past this point, partial access is required (see below).

Partial access: in static file systems, the Range header can be set to 'bytes=x-y', where x starts at 0. For compatibility webfs clients should also transmit it. However, SL-based servers CANNOT parse Range headers. Thus conforming clients should encode this information in the query string:

	`<session URL>foobar.txt?range=x-y`

If a range is parsed successfully from either source, then the response code for either a directory listing or file content changes from HTTP 200 to HTTP 206.


## Deleting files

Deletions are accomplished by calling:

	`<session URL>?action=delete&file=<filename>`

On success the server returns an HTTP 204 code and webfs will send a 'deleted' message to any connected system. On failure the server returns a HTTP 403 code (if denied) or HTTP 404 code (if the file doesn't exist), but does NOT generate a 'denied' message (as that would have to be filtered out). If both failures would apply, 403 takes precedence over 404.


## Writing files

The client sends a POST message to:

	`<session URL>?action=write&file=<filename>`

The POST body is the text to commit to the file.

On success the webfs will send an 'updated' message and an HTTP 204 code, or a 'new' message and HTTP 201 code (if the file did not exist) to any connected system. On failure the server returns a HTTP 403 code, but does NOT generate a 'denied' message (as that would have to be filtered out).


## Appending to files

The client sends a POST message to:

	`<session URL>?action=append&file=<filename>`

The POST body is the text to append to the file.

On success the webfs will send an 'updated' message and an HTTP 204 code, or a 'new' message and HTTP 201 code (if the file did not exist) to any connected system. On failure the server returns a HTTP 403 code, but does NOT generate a 'denied' message (as that would have to be filtered out).

This is identical to a file write, but with action=append instead of action=write.

webfs is tolerant of minor misdeeds like appending to a nonexistent file.


## Statting files

If the client sends:

	`<session URL>?action=stat&file=<filename>`

Then the server should return an HTTP 200 or 206 code and a directory listing consisting only of the information for the specified file.

A stat of the special filename `*` should return information about the directory listing itself:

	`<session URL>?action=stat&file=*`

Statting a nonexistent file or invalid filename should return an HTTP 404 code and a file size of 0.


## Subdirectories

Future versions of webfs might support subdirectories, in which case a stat of the bare directory name or the directory name followed by `/*` should be interpreted as an attempt to stat the directory:

	`<session URL>?action=stat&file=subdir`
	`<session URL>?action=stat&file=subdir/*`

Statting a nonexistent file or invalid filename should return an HTTP 404 code.


## Response codes

	206 - OK on read when contents of file or directory exceed available output buffer
	204 - OK, updated or deleted existing file
	201 - OK, created file in response to read or append
	200 - OK in all other circumstances
	403 - client is authorized but has insufficient permission to complete action
	404 - authorization is adequate, but either file does not exist or filename is invalid
	401 - no valid token was supplied
	400 - `disconnect` action for expired or invalid token


## Callbacks

Added in 2.1.0 of the PATH standard is the ability to send callback messages to a given HTTP or HTTPS URL, which is provided by the client system during connection negotiation. Messages sent to this URL are POSTs with the following JSON syntax:

`{"session":"<token>","message":"<command>","args":[<...>]}`

Where `<token>` is the connection token that the client system is using to access the storage server, `<command>` is the actual signal being sent and `<...>` is a list of zero or more comma-separated data items.

Possible `<command>`s are:

	`update`
	`new`
	`deleted`
	`url`

Once a callback URL is set, the storage host has no way of knowing when the client system is done accessing it. Even if the connection was negotiated over PHASE and the object is deleted, the storage host will continue tracking it. This is necessary to support inter-sim communications. Remember to disconnect properly. Recycling tokens is encouraged for this purpose, as a new host using an old token will pre-empt the older connection.


### update

The `update` callback message indicates that multiple changes have occurred and takes no arguments.

Example `update` POST body:

```
{"session":"00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000","message":"update","args":[]}
```

### new

The `new` callback message indicates that a single file with the specified name (provided as `args`) has been added to the system. As the `new` message does not provide a file size, most clients will need to fetch a refresh of the directory listing after this.

Example `new` POST body:

```
{"session":"00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000","message":"new","args":["file.txt"]}
```

### deleted

The `deleted` callback message indicates that a single file has been removed. The client system may amend its copy of the directory listing to remove this file rather than redownloading the whole directory listing.

Example `deleted` POST body:

```
{"session":"00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000","message":"deleted","args":["file.txt"]}
```

### url

The `url` callback message indicates that the server's URL has changed, likely due to moving to a new region or a region restart. The arguments provided consist of a single string indicating the new base URL.

Example `url` POST body:

```
{"session":"00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000","message":"url","args":["http://simhost-07e5b72529208ad6c.agni.secondlife.io:12046/cap/a644562b-1c14-e872-15da-9777d317f6c2"]}
```


# APPENDIX - COMPATIBILITY CHALLENGES

Normally, transmission of session tokens in the URL is considered a faux pas, as it is perceived as easy to extract and exploit this information. However:

 - Using POST data for this causes compatibility issues. The PATH/webfs protocol is designed to have 100% backward compatibility with static file storage, and some hosts will reject POSTs directed at static pages because they expect this to be used for logging in or modifying content.
 - SL-based web servers cannot access cookies or other custom headers. They are only able to read the content of a handful of headers using llGetHTTPHeader(). This also prevents the use of the 'Range' header within webfs, which we can provisionally solve with GET query parameters that will be ignored by external hosts, unlike unexpected POST messages.
 - The PATH/webfs client implementation cannot have special caveats for SL scripts; we tried that with PHASE and ran out of memory.
 - HTTP-Referer values (the most common form of user-initiated credential leakage associated with URL-encoded session information) cannot be leaked because the client system is not using a web browser.
 - Man-in-the-middle attacks can be mitigated using HTTPS. If they've pwned your HTTPS traffic, they've pwned your cookies and headers, not just your URL.
 - Since the server specifies the actual URL to access (rather than the client assembling it on its own), in the unlikely case that webfs DOES start seeing use serving HTML content, the protocol can be revised to support POSTs conditionally once memory constraints are no longer such an issue. Compliant servers could encode relevant version information inside the provided URL.

Sorry, Five. I tried to make it work, but we just can't budget it.
